---
title: Echovirus 11 phylogenomics
authors: Sten de Schrijver
date: "June 2024"
dataset: "https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?r=region"
abstract: "
Thanks for having a look at the preliminary results section of the phylogenomics study I have performed on Echvirus 11! Note that at this point, I've only included the complete genomes and sequences that contain a full VP1, unless specified otherwise. This amounts to 1704 sequences in total, from both Genbank (n=1402) and from clinical laboratories (n=302).
"
---

# [Echovirus 11 phylogeny VP1 - 2011](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?dmax=2011-12-31&r=region)
One of the more recent in-depth phylogenetic analyses performed on E11 was published in 2011. By this time, the tree based on VP1 looked like this. At this point, most of the sequences had been isolated in Asia. While genotype D was the more common genotype in Europe and West Asia, about 80% of the sequences that had been isolated at this point in time in China fell into genotype A.

# [VP1 phylogeny 2011 - subgenotypes](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Subgenotype&dmax=2011-12-31&r=region)
While in the paper that I refer to, and it other work as well, genotypes A, C and D had been subdivided further into sub-genotypes, I was not able to do this for genotype C due to the stochasticity intrinsic to the creation of these plots. Different runs rendered different trees, with different clades forming in genotype C specifically. Genotypes A and D were rather consistent on the other hand, and they show close resemblance with earlier trees. 

# [VP1 phylogeny 2011 - subgenotype D5](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Subgenotype&dmax=2011-12-31&f_Genotype=D&r=region)
Of all sequences that were classified within genotype D, the vast majority of sequences belonged to sub-genotype D5.

# [VP1 phylogeny 2024](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Subgenotype&r=region)
Looking at the more recent situation, we see that by far most sequences isolated the past decade and a half fall into this D5 sub-genotype, which now accounts for more sequences than all the other genotypes (and sub-genotypes) combined. It is therefore not unreasonable to look at this sub-genotype more closely, and divide this sub-genotype further, into sub-sub-genotypes.

# [VP1 phylogeny - subsubgenotypes](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Subsubgenotype&label=Subgenotype:D5&r=region&showBranchLabels=all)
Upon closer inspection, the D5 sub-genotype can be divided in approximately 12 sub-sub-genotypes. While D5.3 and D5.7 are quite small in size, sub-sub-genotypes D5.9 and D5.12 are enormous, and harbour quite some divergence within them. Another significant portion of the sequences have not been classified into sub-sub-genotypes, either because the position of these branches are not consistent among different simulations, or because the groups in which they appear are simply difficult to classify.

# [VP1 phylogeny - subsubgenotypes over time](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=num_date&r=region&showBranchLabels=all)
This large D5.9 sub-sub-genotype is the one that emerged most recently.

# [VP1 phylogeny - D5.9 geography](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Subsubgenotype&label=Subsubgenotype:D5.9&r=region&showBranchLabels=all)
D5.9, the largest sub-sub-genotype, comprises sequences isolated in European countries exlusively.

# [VP1 phylogeny - D5.9 geography](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=Country&label=Subsubgenotype:D5.9&r=region&showBranchLabels=all)
These sequences have been isolated in Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands.

# [VP1 phylogeny - D5.12 geography](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=region&label=Subsubgenotype:D5.12&r=region&showBranchLabels=all)
Similarly to D5.9, D5.12 is quite geographically isolated, mostly isolated in China. However, the most recently isolated sequences within this sub-sub-genotyep have been found in Europe. 

# [Date of isolated sequences per region](https://nextstrain.org/community/stends2001/E11/PG/VP1?c=region&l=scatter&r=region&scatterX=region&scatterY=num_date&showBranchLabels=all)
While a lot of sequences have been isolated in China, the number of sequences published has strongly reduced since the pandemic. Instead, most sequences isolated in recent years were detected in Europe, likely linked to the risen awareness created for severe Echovirus 11 infections.
